[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr.
And today we're talking
about our health.
And we're talking
about it by covering
a wide range of
topics-- everything
from our greatest health
challenges to ways
to achieve peak performance
and optimal health.
And we're talking about some
of the latest cutting edge
research around that.
All the while, reversing
the aging process.
Does that sound
interesting to you?
Joining me is David Wolfe.
He's one of the world's top
authorities on natural healing,
on organic nutrition,
and superfoods
that we're going to be talking
about a little later on.
Welcome to the show.
>>DAVID WOLFE: Thank you
so much for having me.
>>LISA: Thanks so
much for being here.
David is a true icon
in the health industry,
and I really appreciate
your knowledge,
your immense
participation in helping
people learn a lot
about their bodies.
>>WOLFE: Thank you.
>>LISA: So talk to me about what
you experience when you travel.
What do you hear as
people's biggest health
challenge right now?
>>WOLFE: Definitely the biggest
complaint is low energy.
>>LISA: Energy.
>>WOLFE: That's affecting
just about everybody.
And especially women
are multi-tasking.
So many single moms out there.
There are so many stresses,
pulls from here and there.
So we're getting
depleted adrenally.
We're getting wiped
out on stimulants.
And then we've still
got to get the job done.
So low energy is a big issue.
>>LISA: Low energy,
though, is a result
of a lot of other things.
Right?
>>WOLFE: Right.
Exactly.
It's a result of-- there's
immunological problems
where we don't really have the
immunity that we used to have.
And that actually has a
lot to do with energy.
50% of our immune system is
actually detoxifying our body.
So if our immune
system isn't happening,
then we're getting clogged up.
We're getting backed up, and the
biological machine that we are
doesn't function as efficiently.
>>LISA: So the energy that
our immune system all day
long, it's putting out 50% of
its energy to detoxification.
>>WOLFE: Right.
Exactly.
Clean up the cells.
Get rid of waste products.
Make the cellular
environment happy and healthy
for all the cells to grow in.
>>LISA: So why are diseases
like heart disease and diabetes
and so forth on
the rise so much?
And obesity in children?
Why are those diseases
of epidemic proportions?
>>WOLFE: Well, they've
been there all along.
These diseases have just been
accelerated by our lifestyle.
They've accelerated
by the pollution
that we all are bathed in.
They've been accelerated by the
stress that we're all feeling.
problems with our food supply
and challenges with clean food.
And also challenges with food
that's actually nutritious.
We have a lot of
nutrition problems today.
>>LISA: Salads and so forth?
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
There's not enough minerals
in our salads even.
I had to find this
all out the hard way
by being a real
gastronaut and being
out there really finding out.
Like, OK.
Let me just live on salad for a
few years and see what happens.
And finding out that
even those salads
with all those great
vegetables, still
not enough minerals for us.
And that's really what led
me to the development of all
the ideas about superfoods,
herbalism-- bringing things
together so that we could
create a more holistic dietary
pattern that we could follow.
>>LISA: So this is
not just eat healthy
and live a great lifestyle.
This goes way beyond that.
We're eating healthy.
We're trying to do a
good diet and exercise.
This goes way way beyond that.
>>WOLFE: This goes beyond that.
But it's very simple, actually.
It's very easy.
It's just that now we're
on to the best stuff.
In the old days, it
was like-- in the '50s,
we were eating burgers
and fries and milkshakes
because that's all there was.
>>LISA: Well, I
also to point out
to the people who are
eating burgers and fries
and milkshakes, it's OK because
you can still get to this level
instantly.
It's not something where
you have to graduate to.
You can start applying or
incorporating superfoods
into your diet right away.
>>WOLFE: Well, it's
all about flavor.
We cracked the flavor code.
Why does someone want to have
burgers, fries, and milkshakes?
'Cause it tastes good.
Right?
So how do we make
things taste better?
We've been on that for years.
I've been working
with the top raw food
chefs, superfood chefs,
and herbalists in the world
to crack the flavor code.
We cracked that.
>>LISA: That's why.
>>WOLFE: It tastes better.
>>LISA: It's so good.
So does taste good.
All right.
So let's talk about
energy production.
How exactly does that
work in the body?
I know that you have a few--
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
Let's look at a slide here.
So we've got this slide up
here on the Krebs cycle.
And that's our citric acid
cycle or the cycle in our body
that takes the nutrients,
the raw nutrients--
macronutrients like protein,
carbohydrates, fats, and oils--
and converts it into energy
packets that our body uses.
So for example, our body doesn't
speak in the energy currency
of protein, fat,
and carbohydrate.
It's using a different currency.
It's like you're coming over
to America with British pounds.
>>LISA: Trying to use them.
>>WOLFE: And trying to use them.
And it's like, wait a second.
We don't use those here.
So it has to convert it, and
that's called the Krebs cycle.
And the ratio of protein to fat
to carbohydrates-- that ratio
right there is going
to determine the energy
that we produce.
And that ratio is
unique to the person.
>>LISA: Every
person is different?
>>WOLFE: Every person.
So we have talked about
before that you actually
need moderate carbohydrate,
high protein, low fat diet.
>>LISA: That's me personally.
>>WOLFE: You personally,
that's probably best for you.
>>LISA: Yeah, Dave and I
discussed that a little bit.
Now for most people,
they say a high protein
diet's good for everyone.
Or a vegetarian diet
is good for everyone.
Is that necessarily
the case or not?
>>WOLFE: No, it's
obviously not the case.
We're finding out
more as we go further.
We've never had
the sophistication
of cross-referencing all this
information like we have today.
So everything in the
past is like old news.
Because now in the computer age,
we can cross-reference data.
And we can go,
oh, wait a second.
Now we understand why some
people can be vegetarians,
why some people can't.
Why some people
can be a vegetarian
if they do certain things.
Where they couldn't
before, 'cause they
didn't have those choices.
Right?
All of that's on the table now.
Why does somebody
run into a problem
if they're a blood type A
and they're a meat eater?
Right?
That's the other side
of it is that there's
some people actually
should not be carnivores.
>>LISA: Should
not be eating meat
if they are certain blood types.
Yeah, there's a lot
theory about that.
>>WOLFE: So we're
cross-referencing that data
now, and we're coming to
some startling conclusions.
And that's what we're gonna
get into all through our time
together today.
>>LISA: OK.
So we're talking
about the fact that we
have these rampant diseases
and a lot of people
at the same time are
looking for energy.
And we're learning how--
so how does energy actually
start to occur in the body?
>>WOLFE: OK.
Well, let's look at ATP here.
This is adenosine triphosphate,
probably the best known
nucleotide of all.
Does a nucleotide have
anything to do with a tide?
No, it doesn't.
A nucleotide is an
energy currency.
It's like using the dollar bill.
>>LISA: In the body.
>>WOLFE: In the body, yeah.
So that's how you
produce energy.
Now this is what's
interesting-- this
is a big discovery-- is
that all the foods have
to be converted into
ATP to make energy.
Except for some, and those
are marine phytoplanktons.
There are certain
organisms, like algaes--
you've heard of like Spirulina.
>>LISA: Right.
>>WOLFE: Right.
And there's organisms like
that in the ocean that
can be eaten by a human being
that bypass the Krebs cycle
and are immediately
available as energy.
>>LISA: Oh wow.
That's why they're
called superfoods.
>>WOLFE: Right.
That's why marine
phytoplankton is a superfood.
Jacques Cousteau said the future
of nutrition is in the ocean.
And so now we're
figuring out tricks.
But the key idea, though,
for most of us at home
is-- You know, marine
phytoplankton's exotic.
But what's for most
of us is that we've
got to figure out what the
ratio of fat to carbohydrate
to protein is for us that
really works to produce energy.
Because when the
ratio is correct,
we produce lots of energy.
If the ratio is incorrect, we
produce low amounts of energy
'cause the Krebs
cycle doesn't get
what it needs to produce
the packets of ATP.
>>LISA: OK.
So now what if
somebody, for example,
has blood sugar issues or
diabetes or something like that
where they're constantly
struggling with fluctuations up
and down.
How do they get
that energy cycle
to work if they have blood
pressure fluctuations?
>>WOLFE: OK.
Well, we just look at a person.
Let's say a person
needs a moderate amount
of carbohydrates, but they
can't eat carbohydrates
because they have such
blood-sugar roller-coastering
going on.
Then in that case,
we'd recommend
for that person have
polysaccharides.
What's that?
Seaweed.
Medicinal mushrooms.
Things that contain
long chain sugars
so that you don't get
a blood sugar spike.
You still get the
carbohydrate, but you
don't get the blood sugar spike.
Right?
Even potato can give
you a blood sugar
spike-- baked potato,
blood sugar spike.
Also I'd recommend for
someone in that situation
to go to something like a sweet
potato instead of a potato,
because you get
longer chain sugars
and you have three
times as many minerals.
>>LISA: You've mentioned that
word several times-- minerals.
What is the
importance of minerals
when it comes to energy?
>>WOLFE: OK.
Minerals are very correlated
with the length of life
and a state of consciousness.
Meaning the minerals in
our diet and in our food
and in our environment have
a very strong effect on us.
And this has been shown in
animal studies, for example.
A wildebeest when
it becomes pregnant
will migrate hundreds of
miles to a particular area
of volcanic soil
that has grass that
has a very high amount of
magnesium in it-- six times
as much as where
they normally are.
If they are supplemented
with magnesium,
they don't migrate there.
So minerals affect our behavior.
They affect what we eat.
And minerals also affect
our consciousness.
Now what's important
here is that people
who have diabetes or
hypoglycemia or blood sugar
problems are in a
demineralization syndrome.
>>LISA: That is
not widely known.
>>WOLFE: That is
It's very well known
in the nutrition world,
especially people have been
studying it really deeply
for 50, 60, 70 years.
Back in the days when it was
Dr. Jensen and Dr. Walker.
They knew that there is
a very strong connection
between minerals and nutrition
and our state of health
and that the state
of our health,
in general as a
culture, is related
to the state of our soils.
And I step into their shoes, and
I make that connection for us.
That is very important for us
know about that connection.
>>LISA: Mineral
conversation, from what
I've learned from you,
is very important.
And that's what the
superfoods give us.
>>WOLFE: And the herbs.
And organic food.
Organic food has vastly
more minerals in it
than conventional food.
It's not enough, but
at least it's closer.
>>LISA: OK.
So what about someone who
has a thyroid dysfunction.
What exactly is that?
>>WOLFE: OK.
Well, let's look
at thyroid here.
We were looking at some
slides about protein diets
and sometimes you
need that if you
need to balance out
being too demineralized.
But now let's jump into thyroid.
The thyroid is our shield.
Actually "thyros" is the
meaning of "thyroid."
It's a Greek word
meaning "shield,"
and it shields us
from oxidation.
So let's say we got hit
by a very strong oxidant
like radioactive fallout.
Immediately our
thyroid reacts to that
and pulls out all of its
negatively charged electricity.
The thyroid's like a
reservoir of electricity.
And tries to neutralize
that oxidation, that burn.
>>LISA: So when you
have a thyroid disease,
you have low energy production.
>>WOLFE: Right.
And low electricity.
And so then that will cause
the thyroid to malfunction.
Also the thyroid is
heavily vascularized.
I mean, there's lot of blood
flow through the thyroid.
And what that means is
that it will pick up
things from your
blood than it needs.
However, it can be tricked.
So if it needs--
for example-- iodine
and there's radioactive
iodine in the environment,
it'll pull that in.
If It needs iodine and there's
chloride in the environment--
let's say chlorine water.
That you're drinking
chlorinated water.
It will pull that in.
If there's fluoride in your
body from fluoridated water
and it's passing
by your thyroid,
the thyroid will think,
oh, that's iodine.
But it's not.
It's actually fluoride.
It will pull that in.
So the thyroid has become
totally toxic in our bodies.
This is a huge issue of
what's going on today.
And then it can't do its job.
It can't produce the T3.
It can't regulate
body temperature.
We start having chronic fatigue.
We go into, basically,
mood disorders.
There's a whole bunch of
stuff that's related here.
>>LISA: And it's also the dry
skin and the hair falling out.
And all that.
>>WOLFE: Hair falling out
is a very strong symptom
of thyroid problems.
>>LISA: And eyebrows
thinning and so forth.
Why is that correlated?
>>WOLFE: Well, your thyroid is
your master metabolism gland.
And so there's a lot of
metabolic functions going on
day-to-day with
like, for example,
you're growing your nails.
You're shedding your skin.
You're growing hair.
If your thyroid's
completely out of whack,
then you can't do
those things properly.
Your body doesn't get the
biofeedback loop or something
goes awry.
>>LISA: I see.
All right.
So now all of this-- basically
the overarching conversation
here has to do with the
aging process and how we age.
And what types of
disease start to happen
as we go through years and
years and years of abuse
on our bodies.
>>WOLFE: Right.
>>LISA: And abuse could
be even eating healthy,
as you said earlier.
Which blows my mind.
So all right.
So let's get to some solutions.
Talk to me a little bit
about the aging process
and what that means
when we start to age.
>>WOLFE: There's a number of
meanings to the aging process.
One is oxidation.
OK.
Free-radical theory of aging.
What the heck does that mean?
When we're born out of
our mother's waters,
we've never seen the atmosphere.
All of a sudden, we're
in the atmosphere.
Now this atmosphere, this earth,
actually is needed to survive.
We breathe it.
But it also kills us.
It burns us up,
subtly and slowly.
The oxygen we breathe
actually hurts us.
And that's the free
radical theory of aging
that was put forth about--
jeez, it's been 30 years.
And that's part of
the aging process.
So we want to take in as
many antioxidants as possible
to protect ourself from
breathing our atmosphere.
We don't think of it
that way, you know.
Imagine if we were like
an alien space race,
and we crash landed
on the planet.
And we could survive
in this atmosphere,
but it may not be the best
type of atmosphere for us.
Right?
That's kind of what we're doing.
>>LISA: That's kind
of what's happening.
>>WOLFE: That's kind
That's the story.
>>LISA: Right.
Same with our food
supply and everything.
It's good for you, but it's not.
>>WOLFE: We can survive
on it, but it's not really
the best thing.
So now we're finding out,
well actually, if we really
want to ask that question--
what's best-- what is it?
Another theory of aging
has to do with methylation.
And we're-- basically,
that's why we need raw foods,
so we have enough methyl groups.
For example, beet
juice-- like beet root--
is very high in methyl groups.
Goji berry's very
high in methyl groups.
All fresh foods are
And that helps
our liver detoxify
the 77,000 chemicals
that have been
dumped in the
environment since 1940.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
>>WOLFE: That's a
lot of chemicals.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
And there's seven different
detoxification pathways
in the body that
constantly are working
to detoxify all day long.
It's part of what you were
talking about earlier.
Right?
>>WOLFE: I remember one of
them is like KILLS-- kidney,
intestines, lung, liver, skin.
>>LISA: Good way of--
Good way of remembering--
>>WOLFE: Anyway another
one is telomeres.
So like a shoelace.
Right?
There's that little thing,
that little plastic thing
at the end of the shoelace.
When we're born, we
have that little thing;
it protects the ends
of our chromosomes.
OK.
With every cell replication, a
little bit of that chromosome
is lost.
In every cell.
>>LISA: Little tiny
hairs on a cell.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
Just the little end of
the filament is lost.
There's a little bit
of damage at the end
of the DNA with every cell.
Let's say it's a
white blood cell.
Let's say it's a muscle
cell or a heart cell,
we lose a little bit.
That doesn't make much of a
difference in a year or 10
years or 15 years or 30 years.
But in 100 years, it
makes a huge difference.
>>LISA: So it's those
little tiny hairs are
what enable the
cells to replicate?
>>WOLFE: No, they're just
part of the DNA material.
So what's happening is is
we're experiencing DNA damage
every time the cell
has to replicate.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
I see.
>>WOLFE: And that
little bit of damage
is no big deal in the beginning.
But later it becomes a big deal.
And those endcaps of the
DNA are called telomeres.
So the idea in science-- it's
been around for a long time,
ever since I can
remember actually--
has been to figure out if
there's a way to actually heal
the end of the DNA instead
of losing something or just
stopping the damage.
Is there a way to actually
restore it and get it
back to the original
shoelace end
that we got when we bought
our shoes brand new.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
To heal the telomere.
>>WOLFE: To heal the telomere.
And then that research
led to the discovery
that when you do that, that
you actually become younger--
that the length of that telomere
is correlated to your age.
And the shorter that it
is, the older you are.
And so all of the symptoms
associated with aging
are related to the
length of that telomere.
>>LISA: Was there like a
scientist that discovered this?
Someone who had--?
>>WOLFE: There was.
Let's go jump into it and look
at some of these things here.
OK.
So there's the telomere.
It's the biological
time clock or the fuse
that represents how much
life you've burned off
and how much life you have left.
That's at the end
of your chromosones.
And so then here's the
Nobel Prize Laureates
who really discovered that
the chromosomes are protected
by telomeres and then
it's possible even
to molecularly correct
telomere damage.
We are at a precipice, by the
way, in health and nutrition
and in medicine that
is science fiction.
We're coming there.
What's happening is is we're
realizing, wait a second.
It's possible to
actually get in there
and correct cellular
damage and genetic damage
and de-age ourself and create
the potential of living
not only to be 100, but 200
or 300 or 500 or even more.
>>LISA: The scientific
breakthroughs right now with
this and the stem
cell research are--
>>WOLFE: It's incredible.
>>LISA: Absolutely
amazing what's being done.
And the studies that
are being funded
to replicate the processes.
But the fact that
there are awards
also being gained recently.
I mean this was 2009.
>>WOLFE: Right.
This is big.
>>LISA: All right.
So what they discovered
is that if you
can regrow the length
of the telomere,
that you can actually
reverse the aging process
and stop the damage of what the
free radicals do to the cells.
>>WOLFE: Right.
That's kind of it.
Yeah.
I mean, it's all
meshed together.
Like there's free
radical damage that we're
experiencing from
breathing the atmosphere.
There is methylation
damage we've
gotten because of our food
wasn't really that great.
Plus we have all these
chemicals we're dealing with.
We're breathing it in.
We're eating it all the time.
So we have a
methylation problem,
but we also a telomere problem.
But the telomere problem
is very fundamental.
If we can correct that--
just like when you're 16,
you are stronger.
You have more resistance.
You're in the
prime of your life.
>>LISA: So those are growing.
Those are the telomere
in full swing.
>>WOLFE: Right.
That's like when our
telomeres are healthy.
We haven't lost very much.
And so if we can
get back to that,
we're resistant to
everything else.
That's the idea there.
>>LISA: That's possible?
>>WOLFE: That is possible.
>>LISA: How?
>>WOLFE: This is what
has been discovered now.
This is what we heard about.
Now I don't necessarily believe
that what we heard about
is actually where we really are.
But what we've heard about
and what's been discovered
is that astragalus, which
is the great Chinese herb--
one of the top three, for sure.
It's a root-- contains a
compound which can actually
increase or create in your
genetic code telomerase, which
is a substance that actually
repairs your telomere.
>>LISA: Is that a mineral?
Telomerase?
>>WOLFE: Telomerase
is an enzyme.
>>LISA: An enzyme.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
Anything that ends with
an ASE is an enzyme.
So telomerase is an enzyme
that can correct any damage
to the chromosome end,
which is the telomere.
>>LISA: So it's proven that
if you actually can increase
the telomeres that you can
actually reverse this aging
process and you can do that--
>>WOLFE: With telomerase.
And there's one herb that's
been found that actually--
for sure, we know
actually it does the job.
And that's a concentrate of
a certain particular saponin
fraction of astragalus.
So astragalus may have this
property or it may not,
depending on where its
grown and how its grown.
But if you process it for that
one fraction of astragalus side
four, which is one of the
elements of astragalus.
And you go through
say a ton of material,
you can get enough of that
stuff that you can take it.
And all of a sudden your body
goes, oh, wait, and corrects
any telomere damage
because your body's
able to produce telomerase.
>>LISA: Do you have any pictures
of the telomeres themselves?
>>WOLFE: OK.
So the telomere is
something like-- let's
go into-- let's
see if we got here.
The telomere is like this.
It's at the end
of the DNA strand.
And what we want is we want that
telomerase to actually maintain
and even add length
to the telomere.
It's the very end.
It's just like the
end of a shoelace.
And that's kind
of the idea there.
The telomerase, you can see,
actually correcting and fixing
the end of the DNA.
>>LISA: So this
is the way to-- I
mean, what could the
anti-aging benefits be?
Could it be a better memory?
Could be-- I mean, how do
you propose living longer?
What quality of life is
really what I'm asking.
>>WOLFE: When you're younger
and you have more vital life
force and more energy,
your brain is more clear.
You have more endurance.
You have more
ability to multitask
without the stress
affecting you.
You have a greater stress
defense shield basically
is what I'm saying.
You also have more
reproductive power.
Right?
When you're younger, you
have more reproductive power.
It's like healthier for a woman
to have a baby at, say, 21 than
at 51.
I did meet a woman
who actually had
a baby at 51-- healthy baby.
She was 55, had a four-year-old.
That was amazing.
So this is a really big deal in
terms of like what this means.
It means quality of life
increases, and you live longer.
>>LISA: Quantity and
quality of life increases.
So, OK.
You said the astragalus is one
of the key factors in growing
the telomeres?
>>WOLFE: Right.
That particular fraction of it.
>>LISA: Is there a specific
type of astragalus?
Do you make this in
a tincture or a tea?
We're going to be doing some
amazing demonstrations later
on.
I'm so excited.
>>WOLFE: It's great.
I'm so into astragalus,
I got into growing it.
And I'm just all about it.
But what I found out about
astragalus is is it's
just like anything else.
We've never really
turned this on.
And I'm sure this is where
the big breakthrough is
going to come.
We take whatever herb it is.
And astragalus is now
leading the world right now
in terms of the
top herb on earth.
And we grow it in the
best way ever discovered--
with the most minerals,
the most nutrients,
real natural fertilizers
instead of this chemical stuff.
And really love
the plant the way
it always had wanted to
be loved and supported.
And that's what I
do in my garden.
And then, I suspect
that it's going
to have more of those
chemicals that we want in it.
Do you see where
we're going with that?
>>LISA: Yeah.
Mhm.
So you've been, basically,
all over the world.
You have a farm that
grows all of this stuff.
You've been to the
ends of the earth
to find these various
types of minerals and--
>>WOLFE: I'm into this stuff.
It's not a joke to me.
I'm not just a nutritionist
who says, eat this.
Do that.
This is a good food.
I grow these foods.
I grow these herbs.
I grow these superfoods.
>>LISA: Do you have pictures
of places that you've been
and that where you've--
>>WOLFE: Yes.
>>LISA: Can I see?
I did bring some of those.
>>LISA: David's
traveled all over the--
>>WOLFE: This right here is
a complete mountain range
near my house in Ontario,
Canada of quartz crystals.
And the water there
is extraordinary.
Extraordinary.
>>LISA: Is it that
color because it's
got all the minerals
from the crystals in it?
>>WOLFE: And it glows
for some reason.
I guess it's sitting
in a crystal, so
maybe has something
to do with it.
I drank that water actually.
I drank water out of a lake,
which I normally don't do.
I normally drink spring water.
But that water was so pure
and so clean that I drank it.
>>LISA: It's sitting
on a-- my goodness.
>>WOLFE: And we were
hunting for chaga mushroom
there, which is another one of
the great herbs of the world.
It's like very, very top
of all herbs on earth.
>>LISA: And it grows
near a crystal bed.
>>WOLFE: Right.
Like that.
Yeah.
>>LISA: That's so beautiful.
>>WOLFE: And then you can see
this place in the Grand Canyon.
This is Havasupai
in the Grand Canyon.
It's on the southern
rim of the Grand Canyon.
It's one of the canyons that
leads into the greater Grand
Canyon and eventually
into the Colorado River.
And you can see here,
that vision of paradise.
Now what's interesting
about this place
is that atmospheric temperatures
may be 100 degrees Fahrenheit.
The temperature of that water
is 38 degrees Fahrenheit.
It's freezing.
It's so freezing you
cannot even believe it.
So you're in 100
degrees, you're like,
oh, I could jump in there.
I could swim to that
waterfall easily.
No big deal.
>>LISA: There's no way.
>>WOLFE: But there's no way.
You can, but it's
very difficult.
>>LISA: And that's
in the Grand Canyon?
>>WOLFE: That's in
the Grand Canyon.
>>LISA: That's
absolutely beautiful.
>>WOLFE: There's wild goji
berries growing there.
There's wild pomegranates.
Wild figs.
Wild mulberries.
>>LISA: So these are
the areas that you've
found the superfoods
actually growing.
>>WOLFE: Right.
They're actually growing there.
>>LISA: We should
mention a little bit
about what the superfoods
are and what is a superfood.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
Let's just talk about foods.
There's food, which
is like caloric value.
Macronutrients like protein,
carbohydrate, fats, and oils.
We need those.
That's great.
But superfoods have medicinal
properties like herbs do,
but they also have calories.
Meaning they have carbohydrates.
They have fats and oils.
The have protein.
>>LISA: They're a complete food.
>>WOLFE: So they're
a complete food.
They're like herbs,
but they're food, too.
So we call 'em superfoods.
Like aloe is like that.
Noni is like that.
Maca is like that.
Raw chocolate,
cacao, is like that.
Goji berry is like that.
>>LISA: These are all
mineral-based plant rich foods?
>>WOLFE: These are like
super rich, amazing foods.
Very powerful.
>>LISA: How many are there?
>>WOLFE: I've detailed in
my book, "Superfoods," 20.
But on earth?
There's probably 50.
This is important to know.
Out of all possibilities
on the earth--
let's say there's 250,000
food herbs on the earth
that we can eat-- about
50 of them are superfoods
and about 50 of
them are superherbs.
That's it.
>>LISA: That's all the
foods that we should ever
eat is the superfoods.
>>WOLFE: That's all
you really need, yeah.
>>LISA: That's all
you really need.
>>WOLFE: You don't
even need that much.
But if you had those, yeah.
That's enough.
>>LISA: So the superfoods and
the superherbs would sustain
you completely--
>>WOLFE: Completely.
>>LISA: --and reverse
the aging process.
>>WOLFE: And reverse
Now that is the story that
the Taoist Immortals, who
developed the Shaolin
monasteries and developed
Chinese medicine,
have been telling us
for thousands of years.
And now I understand
it 'cause I've
been a superfood hunter and
an herb hunter for years.
So now I get what
they were getting at.
It's like, oh.
OK.
I like lettuce.
I like apples.
But I don't need those things.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
I mean, that's sustainable
food that you would think
would be great food for us.
But that's maybe how
those types of people
lived to be 120 years old.
Disease free.
All right.
Show us some of the other
places you've gone to.
>>WOLFE: OK.
So lets's look at this.
Check this out.
This is in Iceland,
drinking green drinks.
And that's my friend Sola who's
an amazing chef over there.
She runs the hottest
restaurant in Reykjavik.
And we went all over
Iceland, tracking down
all kinds of exotic things.
This is in the Grand Canyon.
Those are all wild grapes.
And what a sight.
What a place to be.
Grape is, to me,
represents nobility.
It represents the
noble aspect of life.
And what grape really is
able to bring to us in terms
of the chemistry is what
we call resveratrol.
Resveratrol is one of
the great breakthroughs
in longevity research.
And it was originally isolated
because they found out
that people in France who
ate port-- or drank-- port
wine, like really high
phenolic red wine--
like really intense--
lived to be like 110.
Always.
>>LISA: So if we
drink red wine, we'll
be reversing aging. [LAUGHS]
>>WOLFE: Well, I don't
want to say that.
But somebody got
smart and said, what
the heck is in that red
wine that's doing this?
And they finally narrowed
it down to resveratrol,
which is something very special.
It's very interesting compound.
>>LISA: I've seen that
come out in the market.
You see when something
gets really popular,
there's 9 million products
with the name resveratrol
in it and so forth.
I've heard that it
is a pretty-- but you
have to take a lot of it in
order for it to really work.
Is that the case with
the astragalus as well?
>>WOLFE: Well, if you could
isolate just that molecule,
you wouldn't have to take much.
>>LISA: And it depends
on the strength.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
So it depends.
Like if you had real wild
grapes like those right there
and you juiced them
and you drank it,
you'd get a lot of
resveratrol in that drink.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>WOLFE: If you do
it as a wine, you
could get-- if it's a dark
phenolic red wine-- you
can get a lot of resveratrol
in that port wine, for example.
However on a standard white
wine or whatever chardonnay
or something
somebody's drinking,
there's not a whole lot
of resveratrol there.
>>LISA: I notice that a lot
of these pictures, you're
wearing the poncho.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
>>LISA: And we didn't
talk about the poncho.
Tell me why this is
your standard uniform.
You're not a suit-and-tie guy.
>>WOLFE: No.
I do not wear suits and ties.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS]
Where's the poncho from?
>>WOLFE: This is from the
region around Cusco in Peru--
the sacred city, the belly
button of South America.
And what I like
about it is it's all
made outside by women,
with their families
and their animals,
next to a wild creek.
When you see it, it's amazing.
It's the exact antithesis
of sweatshop labor.
It is the polar opposite.
And it makes you realize
that, like Dickens said,
"It was the best of times.
It was the worst of times."
Where we see the worst
of times going on,
there must be something
that's the polar opposite.
And this is the most natural,
the most pure garment
that has the longest history
of being made on the earth.
It's all natural dyes--
lapis, cochineal.
>>LISA: The blue
is lapis lazuli?
>>WOLFE: Yep.
>>LISA: The gem?
>>WOLFE: So they crush
the gem with water,
and they get that
blue color out.
And it does come out actually
if you crush the gem.
And then you soak the
alpaca wool in that,
and it takes on a blue color.
And you can see that it can fade
>>LISA: So it's a
gem poncho, too.
>>WOLFE: It's a gem poncho.
It has all those sacred herbs
that they use in South America
and Peru in here as a dye.
So I'm wearing that.
And you feel it.
That's why I wear this
stuff 'cause you feel it.
>>LISA: And the energy
that comes from it,
it will never fade because
it's right through and through.
And you said this one
was from an insect.
The red?
>>WOLFE: Yeah, the cochineal.
Yeah it's an insect that
eats the prickly pear cactus.
And one of things too that
I love about this look
is that Clint Eastwood
didn't go far enough.
He had a good look
going there for awhile,
and he just didn't
go far enough.
And that's one
thing I want to do.
I want to take it all way.
>>LISA: You're aiming higher.
This is great.
I like that model.
OK.
So show me one of the other
ones, the place that you live.
Right?
>>WOLFE: That's the forest
behind where I live.
And that's out chaga hunting.
You can see my heavy
duty poncho right there.
That was about minus
20 degrees centigrade.
>>LISA: So a lot of
different ponchos.
They work really well for you.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
It's great.
I mean, I love the woods.
I love wild places.
I have a passion for plants,
and I love sharing that.
And I love sharing
the possibilities
of what's coming
down the pipeline.
And so what I'm going to
request of everybody who's
listening right now is,
you give me 15 years.
So you hang in
there for 15 years.
You do whatever you can do.
You do every exercise.
You do the best you can.
You do the organic foods.
You do superfoods.
You do the herbs as best
you can for 15 years,
and I'm going to
get you another 40.
That's my promise.
>>LISA: Wow.
Wow.
>>WOLFE: We'll figure out
how to do that for you.
It's gonna happen.
>>LISA: That's a
beautiful promise.
So what we're going
to do now is we're
going to go-- David
has put together--
and this is such
a great thing-- is
he is going to be the
master blender chef.
And we have all
these ingredients
that we've been talking about.
And he's going to teach
us how to put together
these specific drinks
for balancing blood sugar
and for improving
brain function.
He's put his 20 years of
research and all of the places
that he's gathered these
incredible, wild, harvested
herbs from and put them
into one drink-- two,
actually-- for you guys.
So get your pens and papers
ready and check this out.
>>LISA: With the incidents
of type 2 diabetes
raising to epidemic
proportions, there
is a need for something that
will balance blood sugar that
is in the form of a food--
and balance blood pressure.
David Wolfe, who is the
master blender chef,
is going to teach us how to make
a drink that actually balances
blood pressure?
>>WOLFE: And blood
sugar and builds blood.
So this is all about blood.
>>LISA: This is groundbreaking.
For me, this is incredible.
I mean, children
have this issue.
Pets have high blood pressure.
It's something that needs a
solution that's food based.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
We've gotta get it from food.
So it's like something
we're doing every day,
so we don't have to rely
on drugs to save our life.
We've gotta take it on
as a responsibility.
>>LISA: Can you do
this in addition?
I mean, we're not saying get
off of your blood pressure
medication.
Can do this in addition
to what you're taking?
>>WOLFE: Absolutely.
Because really, these are foods.
And so there's
nothing really that's
overtly, pharmacologically
too strong in any of this.
This is food.
So we're just going to be
building a drink that's
food that's going
to build blood,
help bring down that blood
sugar-- tone it down.
And help also bring
down the blood pressure.
>>LISA: And this is
ancient knowledge
that food is medicinal.
>>WOLFE: Right.
Exactly.
And actually, a lot of these
things that are here-- I'm
just looking at a few of them.
I'm like, oh, these
have already been used.
Like for example, lucuma, cacao,
cashew, cayenne, and vanilla
and salt have all been put into
formulas in Mexico and Central
America for thousands of years.
>>LISA: The cacao is chocolate.
>>WOLFE: Right.
So this is cacao or
chocolate in its raw form.
And that's going to be the
fundamental basis of our drink
here.
>>LISA: That is beautiful.
That's the cacao nut?
>>WOLFE: Right.
That's the cacao nut, sometimes
called a cacao bean or cocoa
bean.
And this is the nut that all
chocolate is made out of.
And you can see how
it looks like a brain.
Because it is one of the
best brain foods on Earth.
>>LISA: But it's not sweet.
It's really kind
of a mild taste.
It's not strong.
It's--
>>WOLFE: For so many years,
people told me, you know,
this isn't going to be a
good thing for the public.
It's too bitter.
And I'm like, millions of
people drink bitter coffee
every morning.
What are you talking about?
So now we unleash the
raw chocolate revolution,
and people eat these
straight and love them.
>>LISA: I just did,
before [LAUGHS] I asked.
>>WOLFE: Because we like
bitter even though we've
been so sugared
out that we've been
trying to sugarcoat everything.
We do like bitter.
>>LISA: The bitter, the better.
Right?
>>WOLFE: The bitter, the better.
You got it.
>>LISA: So now this has-- is
loaded with magnesium, calcium.
This is one of the
highest sources
on the planet of magnesium.
>>WOLFE: Of magnesium.
It's number one in magnesium of
any food on the planet, which
is a very important
blood mineral.
It's a very important
alkaline mineral--
one of the most important.
Another thing is
that it's the highest
of any plant in
iron and manganese.
So iron and manganese
have to go together.
That's like the big brother
and the little brother.
>>LISA: And the magnesium
helps transport it
into the blood stream?
>>WOLFE: It's actually
iron and manganese.
So we have magnesium, which
is something different-- which
is an important
alkaline mineral.
Very important.
It's like calcium.
It's like that important.
OK.
But this also has
iron and manganese,
which is different
than magnesium.
Iron and manganese build
the blood chemistry.
They build the
electricity of the blood.
They give you that charismatic,
powerful, magnetic activity
of the blood.
>>LISA: You know what
I like about getting
your sources of iron from
foods is because the body will
automatically regulate
how much it needs.
>>WOLFE: Right.
That's how we're
supposed to be doing it.
>>LISA: That's
what I would hope.
>>WOLFE: Yes.
And chocolate-- I
mean, what better way
to do it than to
just do chocolate?
Like, this is not
a struggle folks.
This is something
you want to do.
OK.
What else about this?
The Aztecs called cacao--
they had a slang for it which
was yolotl etzli, and
that means "heart blood."
And it had been
known for thousands
of years that chocolate is
the best food for your blood,
and it is by far the
best food for your heart.
That's another thing
about all this.
This is amazingly
valuable heart food.
It builds your heart.
>>LISA: So they go hand
in hand, of course.
>>WOLFE: They go hand in hand.
Now I'm just going to
tell you a statistic that
is one of the most
shocking things ever.
It is the most shocking
thing ever discovered
in the whole history
of all food as it
relates to being
active for our health.
And the number one killer in
our world is heart disease.
Heart disease still
takes out more people
than cancer, everything.
Heart disease is number
one cause of death.
Research coming out
of the Netherlands
indicated when they studied
men 65, 70, 75, and 80
that those who ate
the most chocolate
had the least chance
of dying of any cause--
especially heart attack.
They found out that
it decreased your risk
if you eat
chocolate-- especially
this kind of chocolate, raw
chocolate or dark chocolate.
>>LISA: Yeah.
We're not talking
about Halloween candy.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
Thank you.
Some people get confused.
I don't know what that stuff is.
I hope you never eat
that stuff ever again
or I hope you've never
even heard of it.
>>LISA: It doesn't actually
happen to have chocolate in it.
Does it?
It's just a combination
of sugar and--
>>WOLFE: They've
tried to strip out
every last bit of
chocolate out of there.
They can't get rid of
cacao because there still
has to be a little
bit in there, 'cause
you can't mimic the
flavor artificially.
But they've tried.
We're not trying that.
We're going the other way.
We want the actual flavor.
But what's interesting
about cacao
is that this Dutch study found
that the more cacao you ate,
the longer you lived.
Now that's been known.
Cacao's number one
longevity food in the world.
How about that one?
But here's the thing
that's a shocker.
Cacao decreases your risk of
dying of a heart attack by 50%.
>>LISA: In this raw form.
>>WOLFE: Yeah, or
dark chocolate.
OK.
Now let me just--
>>LISA: It has to have-- OK.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
It has to have the cacao
flavonols in there.
It has to have
that dark pigment.
Now let me just tell
you how bizarre that is
and how ridiculous it is.
This is the number one
killer in the world.
There is a food you can eat that
can knock your risk of dying
of that disease in half.
There is no supplement.
There is no food.
There is no superfood.
There is no herb
on this earth that
can claim that effect
on any major condition
or any major disease
on the Earth.
>>LISA: That's why they call
you "the chocolate guy."
>>WOLFE: Right.
>>LISA: I see now.
I see it now.
Yes.
>>WOLFE: The longest lived
woman in the Western world,
Jeanne Calment.
She lived to be 122
years old and 164 days.
And she ate-- are
you ready for this?
A kilo of chocolate per week.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
So she just ate these on--
>>WOLFE: Like baker's chocolate.
>>LISA: But these are
very, very flavorful.
I mean they're--
>>WOLFE: It's the
best news ever.
It's literally the
It's what you always wanted.
It's what we always
dreamed about.
And I will say this, all these
years people said, oh, no.
Chocolate bad.
Blah, blah, blah.
And chocolate definitely
causes irrational behavior
in people who don't eat it.
That's kind of a joke.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS] I got it.
Yeah.
>>WOLFE: I found
for me personally,
the more and deeper
I've gotten into it,
it's actually totally
transformed my brain.
It totally transforms
the way I think.
It's actually made me smarter.
>>LISA: And it's really not--
I mean, chocolate the way
that we know it is that
caramelized, vanilla, sugarized
thing that comes in the bars.
This is the raw cacao--
>>WOLFE: This is the real deal.
>>LISA: --nut.
And you can eat this like candy.
>>WOLFE: We're going to use
that as the first ingredient
in our formula here.
So why don't we get
this blender opened up,
and let's see what we got here.
>>LISA: Our beautiful blender.
>>WOLFE: OK.
Look at that.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS] Look at
the Vanna of the blenders.
All right.
>>WOLFE: So we've got about
ten cacao beans in there.
This could be cacao
powder- raw cacao powder.
It could be raw cacao nibs.
You like nibs.
I know you munch on
nibs all the time.
>>LISA: I do.
Yes.
That's my study food.
Nibs.
I love those.
>>WOLFE: So great to study.
Just take a little of this
and just nibble at it.
And the reason why
they're called nibs
is 'cause they're these
pieces but broken up.
If I took this and I crush
it into a few pieces,
look at that.
Instant nibs.
Right?
>>LISA: And you
can just eat those.
Now does this have
caffeine in it?
>>WOLFE: There's very little
caffeine in chocolate.
In fact it's so little,
we've done three tests.
One test found nothing.
One test found 1/20
of what's in coffee.
And another test found
1/10 of what's in coffee.
So caffeine, it's
very de minimis
aspect of what chocolate is.
They've been adding
caffeine to chocolate bars.
But cacao itself is a
poor source of caffeine.
So I just wanted
to clarify that.
OK.
So we're going to just
throw that all in there.
Now we've got our
heart blood in there,
and we're going to add
something else that's
a very important part of
this whole blood drink
that we're building.
And that is cashews.
Cashews are a complete protein.
That's the latest
news on the street.
>>LISA: A complete
protein, meaning?
>>WOLFE: They are
a complete protein.
>>LISA: What does that mean?
>>WOLFE: Meaning they have
all the essential amino acids,
all eight amino acids--
or nine, depending
on who you believe on essential
amino acids and protein.
And they're also very rich
in manganese and magnesium,
like cacao.
So they do have a
very long history
in Central America and South
America being eaten with cacao.
And they're a great carrier.
They carry the flavor.
So they're a great
blood builder as well.
So we're going to put
some cashews in there.
How much?
Well, just enough to make
this the best drink ever.
OK.
So there we go.
>>LISA: Cashews and chocolate.
So far, we're off
to a great start.
>>WOLFE: And then we
got this over here.
We're going to add
this last, of course.
You know how I do things?
Let's get all the powders
and the foods in their first,
and then we put in
our coconut water.
This is coconut water,
which-- if you've
heard the rumor--
back in World War I
and even in the Japanese war in
the South Pacific, when troops
were injured, they
would actually
use coconut water
as blood plasma.
So you could actually put
an IV of coconut water
up and then drip it into
somebody's blood directly.
>>LISA: Because it has the same
nutrients that mimic blood.
>>WOLFE: Yep.
It's blood plasma.
There's your blood
plasma right there.
You need to build blood?
There it is.
There's your coconut water.
>>LISA: Minerals--
>>WOLFE: Electrolytes.
>>LISA: --amino acids,
electrolytes, potassium.
All that's in-- sodium?
>>WOLFE: A little bit of sodium.
So this is really better
than any sports drink.
I've got news for you.
And I did that research.
I put it in my
"Superfoods" book.
There's actually a
whole bunch of research
out there comparing sports
drinks to coconut water,
and nature does it better.
Nature does it better.
>>LISA: Yeah.
That's what this is.
OK.
>>WOLFE: Ann Wigmore, in the old
days, used to use coconut water
and then wheatgrass juice.
Green juice-- like celery juice,
parsley juice, cilantro juice,
wheatgrass juice-- is also
an excellent blood builder.
And if we had a juicer out here,
we'd be doing it that way too.
So you can do both of those.
If you're dealing with-- for
example, a friend of mine
was bleeding for 60 days.
She had a miscarriage,
bled for 60 days.
And she basically did like
chlorella, spirulina, cacao--
that was her
thing-- for 60 days.
And she's a vegan, so she's
beyond even vegetarian.
She's a vegan and did
not become anemic.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
To rebuild the blood to--
>>WOLFE: That's how
powerful this is.
Just so we know.
That's how powerful this is.
>>LISA: So back to the coconut,
if you've ever-- of course,
you have-- opened
up a coconut and you
get that beautiful
water from inside,
you can use it on your
hair and your skin.
You could just pour the
thing all over yourself.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
It's the best ever.
Coconut water is like
heaven's own reward.
It's one of the great things.
It's how you know
you're in paradise.
I mean, think about
our vision of paradise.
We're in paradise.
Where are we?
We're on a beach.
What are we drinking?
A coconut.
Right?
>>LISA: Absolutely.
Alright, I'll be back.
[LAUGHS] OK.
>>WOLFE: Actually you
can stay, because we're
going to put that in there.
And we're going to make a
chocolate, coconut blood drink.
This is so important
to get this idea
about chocolate and
blood and blood building.
That's to me is--
people do not know that.
Like in the world,
it's not known.
>>LISA: It's because
of the way that we
have the image of
chocolate in our minds.
>>WOLFE: RIght.
And it's like that candy
and whatever that was.
OK.
Now, let's go back over to here.
Lucuma.
>>LISA: Lucuma.
>>WOLFE: Lucuma has
been eaten with cacao
for thousands of years.
It's a non-glycemic
sweetener, so it
doesn't spike your blood sugar.
>>LISA: It's a fruit?
>>WOLFE: It's an
eggfruit, canistel.
One of of favorite
fruits to grow.
I grow it.
I'm absolutely enamored
with this fruit.
>>LISA: And does it look like--
is it like gray on the outside?
What does it look like?
>>WOLFE: It can be
orange on the outside.
It can be brownish
on the outside.
Depends on the variety.
It can be really
smooth-skinned on the outside.
And it's related to
the mamey sapote,
if you know what that is.
Some people from
Cuba, Cuban descent.
They're like, oh, mamey.
We know what that is. 'Cause
that's the fruit of Cuba.
It's the queen of
all fruits in Cuba.
OK.
So we're going to
put that in here.
And that's going to give
us delightful flavor.
It's an emulsifier.
It's going to bring these oils
from the cacao and the cashew
together with all of these
disparate elements that we
have. 'Cause you know, we've
got a lot of interesting things
here.
We have to make
it work together.
>>LISA: So that's
more for flavor,
and you can use it as a food.
What would you use that
in terms of-- could you
use it for baking?
Could use it for--
>>WOLFE: Yes.
You absolutely can
bake cakes with it.
And they use it for ice cream in
South America quite regularly.
It's the number one
ingredient in ice cream.
>>LISA: Great for
sugar substitute?
>>WOLFE: Yes.
It's the best.
>>LISA: Especially for
diabetics who are looking--
>>WOLFE: Very good.
>>LISA: --low-glycemic food.
OK.
That's great.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
So for blood sugars,
we're not going
to add anything sweet here.
This is just coconut
water, and the lucuma
are going to be kind of
adding that low glycemic piece
to our puzzle to
make it taste good.
OK.
Now we've got chaga
and reishi mycelium
and through the
Longevity Warehouse,
which is the company that
distributes my stuff,
we developed a number
of very cool products.
I like this product
because it gives people
their money's worth.
When we're looking
at all of this,
we're looking at really
pennies in a bowl.
You know, $13 for
a bag of chlorella.
That's just a little
bit of it so--
>>LISA: And that's
for a whole bag.
>>WOLFE: The whole bag.
This is just one little bit.
>>LISA: So you can make
these drinks for under $1.
>>WOLFE: This is close
to about $1 worth.
I mean, the only thing
that's actually expensive
here is actually the cashews.
Everything else is very
inexpensive-- especially
in this form.
When you buy it in bulk
off the internet is great.
And that's why we do that
through our Longevity
Warehouse is we want to
be able to get people bulk
powders of these
medicinal mushrooms.
Instead of having to go
through all those capsules.
All those capsules
are just too much.
>>LISA: If you really
emptied all those out,
that'd be a really small amount.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
If you go into a
health food store
and you buy a little
bottle of reishi mushroom,
by the time you get the 60
capsules out there and open
'em, you've got about
maybe that much.
You don't have much.
>>LISA: So you're going to
put all that into one drink.
>>WOLFE: All that's
going in there.
>>LISA: So that's
the chaga mushroom?
>>WOLFE: Chaga and reishi.
That's king and queen.
>>LISA: King and queen
in the mushroom family.
>>WOLFE: King and queen.
When you have the
king and queen,
it's good to have the prince
around, but you don't need it.
>>LISA: But why are they?
What are their functionalities?
>>WOLFE: They're the powerful
immunological substances
that we know of.
Immunological.
They're also great for
our nervous system.
They feed our brain,
and they're really
important for our joints.
They contain the same
types of materials
as you would find in glucosamine
chondroitin, for example.
>>LISA: Really?
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
>>LISA: So it's nature's form.
>>WOLFE: This is nature's form.
And this, to me, is
a very big advance
in herbalism to get it in
this powdered form like this.
We call it reishi
mycelium or chaga
mycelium That's
that powdered form.
>>LISA: And this
is just the pure--
it's not filled with anything
and there's nothing that needs
to be put around it to--
>>WOLFE: Right.
You don't have to do anything.
You don't have to
make a tea out of it.
You just throw the powder
in or you just eat it.
Kids can eat it.
It tastes good.
>>LISA: It doesn't
have any fillers.
It's just pure-- the mushroom--
>>WOLFE: Right.
There's no flow agents.
There's no excipients.
There's nothing like that.
I mean, I don't know
about you, but I
don't want any of that stuff.
I don't want magnesium stearate.
I don't want any
kind of flow agents.
I don't want anti-caking agents.
I don't want calcium
carbonate added.
I want nothing.
I want the food.
That's it.
Isn't that crazy?
>>LISA: That was my point.
>>WOLFE: It has to come to this.
Right?
It comes all the way to this.
>>LISA: Again, this is what
to do, not what not to do.
All right.
>>WOLFE: OK.
Next is chlorella, the highest
chlorophyll-containing plant
in the world.
>>LISA: Look at
how green that is.
>>WOLFE: And it's crazy.
I love just the way--
>>LISA: That's so pretty.
>>WOLFE: --it moves.
Right?
It's like something from
another planet or-- It's crazy.
>>LISA: It's
naturally that green?
>>WOLFE: It's
naturally that green.
It's 40 times higher than
wheatgrass in chlorophyll.
>>LISA: OK.
Purpose of chlorophyll is?
>>WOLFE: Chlorophyll is
identical to hemoglobin
except with one
mineral difference.
In your blood, your
hemoglobin, it's
iron that's at the center of
the exact same molecule that's
the shape of chlorophyll.
And in a plant, there's
just magnesium in there.
Now they hired the
top four scientists
in this area to figure out
when the switch happens.
So if you eat chlorophyll
and it converts to blood,
when does the magnesium get
[SNAPS FINGERS AND MAKES A
POPPING SOUND] popped out
and when does the iron
get [SNAPS FINGERS AND MAKES A
POPPING SOUND] popped in?
Three of the four said they
couldn't figure it out.
The fourth one said--
this is what he actually
concluded-- the magnesium
is turned into iron, which
is a major faux pas in science.
That's how mysterious
this stuff is, really.
>>LISA: This does that?
So this basically builds blood?
>>WOLFE: Whenever you see
green like that, that's blood.
That's blood.
I want you to think
that from now on.
Whenever you see
green foods, whenever
you see super green
juices, whenever
you see green powders-- I
just want you to think blood.
>>LISA: So why would
something like this
be better than a green,
like a kale spinach juice?
>>WOLFE: Great question.
Well, the reason is
because this has 40 times
or more chlorophyll in
it than a kale juice.
I love green juices.
But you'd have to drink
40 times the amount
to get that dosage
of chlorophyll.
Yeah.
>>LISA: That's very
cost-effective right there.
>>WOLFE: This is why, like
with the kids that I coach
and that I hang out with,
we got 'em on chlorophyll.
We got 'em on chlorella.
They have to be.
Because breathing all this
fumes of cars and exhaust
and everything, you
have to have something
that detoxifies
your system of that.
Chlorophyll does that.
What about the
blood of your life?
The river of your life?
Your bloodstream?
>>LISA: Well, river's
a great analogy,
because it takes out
the toxins as it builds.
>>WOLFE: That's exactly it.
It's a river, so it's
got to be cleansed.
What is it?
What builds and
cleanses your blood?
That right there.
>>LISA: Can it cleanse
fat out of the blood?
>>WOLFE: Good question.
I don't know the answer to that.
>>LISA: Oh, sorry.
OK.
I just wondering
because-- I mean,
that's something that really
causes a lot of heart disease
is the fat in the
blood and so forth.
>>WOLFE: Let me tell
you what does do that.
Goji berries and cacao and
bell peppers do do that.
And I was doing research at
the University of Arizona
on goji berries, and I came
across this research article
that ended up in my
"Superfoods" book.
And in there, it talked
about cacao and goji berries
and bell peppers
have this property
of protecting and shielding
your cardiovascular system
from fatty deposits
gluing themselves
on in certain points.
For example, in your
coronary artery,
which can cause heart disease.
>>LISA: So cacao,
goji berries, and--
>>WOLFE: And bell peppers.
>>LISA: --and bell peppers.
What's the property
in there that
doesn't allow the
fat to coagulate.
>>WOLFE: It's two compounds
actually, and one of them
is related to the
methylxanthines,
if you can remember that.
>>LISA: He knows everything.
I mean, you're amazing.
>>WOLFE: One of them is
related to the methylxanthines,
and the other's
related to dopamine.
>>LISA: Really?
>>WOLFE: It's like EPA dopamine.
It's a similar
compound to dopamine
that has this property of-- it's
like an anti-caking property.
It keeps the oils in
your blood from gluing
onto your cardiovascular system.
That's why cacao may be the
most powerful anti-aging,
heart-friendly,
cardiovascular-friendly food
of all.
>>LISA: So actually, you
just mentioned a great word--
longevity, anti-aging.
What we're doing here is we're--
>>WOLFE: This is
serious longevity stuff.
>>LISA: Reversing the
aging system here, folks.
>>WOLFE: We're about to put
this on steroids, as they say.
>>LISA: We're about to be
120 just standing here.
All right.
>>WOLFE: So we're going to
get all that out of there.
Here's where it
goes onto steroids.
The He Shou Wu.
This is a Chinese herb.
This is about Mr. Ho.
Mr. Ho was infertile.
He was 50 years old.
He could not father children.
>>LISA: This is a true story?
>>WOLFE: This is a true story.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WOLFE: It comes out of China.
It's a legend behind this herb.
And what happened was is one
day he'd lost all his hair.
He turned gray.
He was impotent, infertile.
Basically, it was
the worst news ever.
That's basically the
worst situation ever.
And this plant kept talking
to him on his way home
from work every day.
And one day he went
to this herbalist.
And he said, this
plant is talking to me.
I'm not into plants.
I don't get why this
plant is talking to me.
And the herbalist
said, oh, oh, oh.
This is a plant that has
these properties like this,
this, this.
It makes you younger.
Helps you grow your hair back.
Turns your hair from
gray back to dark.
Increases your longevity.
Increases your potency.
Increases your fertility.
And he's like, that's
exactly what I need.
So he started doing mega
amounts of this herb.
Now this is one of the most
non-toxic foods on Earth.
In fact, no matter how
much of this you eat,
you can't kill yourself.
They've been doing
studies on mice with this.
They can put, literally,
the mouse's weight--
injected-- of this material
into the mouse per day.
And the mouse will still
not die-- or even be toxic.
>>LISA: And have 117 babies.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WOLFE: So that's going in.
>>LISA: All right.
Great.
>>WOLFE: Right.
So we do that because
it's-- we call it yen jing.
It's bone marrow.
It gets that stem
cell coming out
of the bone marrow that
produces your blood.
Right?
>>LISA: Say it again.
What is the name of it?
>>WOLFE: It's He
Shou Wu or Fo-Ti.
>>LISA: And this
builds bone marrow?
>>WOLFE: Builds bone marrow.
It's a bone marrow
building food.
>>LISA: Of course.
That makes sense if we're
talking about building blood.
>>WOLFE: Blood.
Right.
It's gotta have
He Shou Wu in it.
I put this recipe together.
So I was like, you gotta
have that in there.
Now this is what I do for myself
every day, a drink like this.
And that's the thinking
that's behind it too,
because I found
out over the years,
it's all about
attention and intention.
Attention and intention.
>>LISA: And with
things like this,
with these types of drinks,
you don't need large meals.
>>WOLFE: Oh, you don't
even need to eat at all.
I went for months without eating
anything-- just doing these.
When I first really kind of
cracked the code of like, oh,
wait.
Chocolate's the delivery
system for all this stuff.
And, you know, I got on the
full-on chocolate drinks--
Mayan style the way the
Aztecs and the Mayans
and the Toltecs and the
Olmecs and the Mixtecs
had been doing it for
thousands of years.
It was like all this
world opened up.
And then all of a sudden,
I went like three months
without even eating anything.
I just drank stuff.
>>LISA: So this could also
promote weight loss, which
would also help with the
diabetes which would also
help with the heart disease.
And so it kind of
is all-inclusive.
>>WOLFE: Right.
Exactly.
That's a lot of food.
You'll see.
When we drink this,
it's like this is food.
This is substance.
>>LISA: Not so pretty
right now, but I'm
sure it's going to get better.
>>WOLFE: So you'll feel it.
You'll be full.
Yeah.
It's looking good.
Isn't it?
OK.
Now next one's cinnamon.
We gotta have cinnamon,
because cinnamon's-- you know,
it's chromium.
Cacao and chromium, by the
way-- cacao and cinnamon
are the highest in chromium
of any foods in the world.
>>LISA: And so also tell me a
little bit more about cinnamon.
People might not
know that it also
has-- I just
mentioned weight loss.
That I heard something about
it having weight loss effects?
>>WOLFE: It has
weight loss effects.
>>LISA: Is that true?
>>WOLFE: Absolutely.
>>LISA: In what way?
>>WOLFE: Well chromium,
it shuts off your appestat
like magnesium does.
So if you get enough
chromium, you stop eating.
That's one of the
ways that cacao works.
Cacao's super rich in
magnesium and chromium.
So as soon as your body gets
that, the appestat shuts off.
>>LISA: That's the appetite
signal in the brain?
>>WOLFE: That's your appetite
signal in your brain.
There's another
piece of this too.
And that is cinnamon is very
anti-fungal, anti-microbial,
anti-candida.
So part of what goes
on with candida,
as you know 'cause you're
friends with Donna Gates,
is that you've got little
critters in there going,
we want the sugar.
We want the garbage.
We want the junk.
>>LISA: Makes them grow.
>>WOLFE: So then they want
certain types of foods.
And all of a sudden,
you go, wait.
I really want junk food.
You see it affects--
>>LISA: That's why
you crave the sugars.
>>WOLFE: We crave the sugars.
>>LISA: You're
feeding the parasites.
>>WOLFE: So cinnamon is one
of the great anti-fungal,
antimicrobial herbs
on earth that we
know about that's
available to us.
So if we put that in, it starts
to fight the critters back
and kills off their appetite.
Because if they get
killed back, then
you don't get a strong
enough signal anymore
that breaks through your
consciousness and goes,
let me eat junk.
>>LISA: So you want to get the
ground cinnamon or something--
I mean, you could--
>>WOLFE: I like whole cinnamon.
I like ground
cinnamon sometimes,
but I like whole cinnamon.
I'll just throw
little chunk in there,
and the blender will
just disintegrate it.
Yeah.
That's what I do.
>>LISA: All right.
That's great to
know about cinnamon
because it's very
readily available.
All right.
>>WOLFE: The smell's
just-- gah, it's good.
>>LISA: I know.
It does smell good.
>>WOLFE: OK.
Now, vanilla bean.
We've got a little
bit of vanilla
here to bottom out the formula.
We got chocolate.
You gotta have vanilla.
>>LISA: Ooh.
Chocolate, vanilla, and cashews.
I mean, yeah.
We're making a-- this
is a blood tonic?
>>WOLFE: This is
the best news ever.
>>LISA: You would think
it would be something
really harsh and
not great tasting.
And yeah, you've got a lot
of great elements in here.
>>WOLFE: I want to
tell you about vanilla.
We've been to something really
interesting with vanilla.
We're running a
chocolate farm in Hawaii,
and one day I'm
looking at my trees.
And I have a whole
bunch of vanillas,
'cause vanilla's an orchid.
And we've got a bunch
going in our nursery.
And one day I'm
like, wait a second.
Chocolate and vanilla.
So I-- what you do with vanilla
is you take the orchid out
there, and you
hang it in a tree.
I'm like, let's hang
'em in the cacao trees.
So we went out there, and
we hung all the vanillas
in the cacao trees.
Now we've got chocolate and
vanilla growing together.
They grow together.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS] Oh my goodness.
I love the way you live.
>>WOLFE: That was an incredible
experience, I have to say.
When that clicked
and it was like, oh.
Wait a second.
That's how it's
supposed to be done.
>>LISA: So you're
growing that together.
Have you manifested
anything from it
that you've been
able to taste yet?
>>WOLFE: The vanillas
haven't fruited yet.
But the plan is is that we'll
have single-tree chocolate
bars, so the entire thing
comes from that tree.
It's not like single
estate origin, terroir,
or these things.
If you're a
chocolate aficionado,
you know what I'm talking about.
If you're not, you
probably don't.
But if you're really into
like high-grade chocolate,
there's like single-origin
or single-estate or terroir
that are like single
types of cacao.
We're going even
one step further.
We're going single-tree
chocolate bars
and all the vanilla comes
from that tree, too.
>>LISA: All you need
to know is if you
want to be anything
like this guy,
just listen to what he
has to say. [LAUGHS]
Got an amazing amount of energy.
>>WOLFE: That's the future.
My feeling is is
like wines are now
and all of that tremendous
explosion of interest in wine
tasting and all
that, that's where
chocolate's going
to be in 10 years.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>WOLFE: That quick.
>>LISA: Chocolate bars?
>>WOLFE: Yep.
>>LISA: Wow.
That sounds great.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
So that's part of the thinking
of vanilla and how you do it.
Now we've got a
little bit of cayenne.
We've got to have that 'cause
cayenne's all about blood.
You want to thin your
blood-- you can save yourself
if you're having a
heart attack, sometimes
by mega amounts of cayenne.
It's really good to know that.
It's Dr. Schulze.
He was the guy who told us that.
That if you do mega
amounts of cayenne
during a heart attack episode,
you can save your life.
>>LISA: It's an amazing healer.
>>WOLFE: It's an amazing,
powerful substance.
>>LISA: Incredible properties.
>>WOLFE: I was one time in
an airport in Costa Rica
and I was hunting around for
honey 'cause we had cacao
and we had cayenne.
And so I found this honey.
We come back, and we're dippin'
the cacao bean into the honey
then into the cayenne
then eating it.
>>LISA: That's why
you don't eat food.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
Try that.
>>LISA: But this
has-- you can also
put it directly on,
sometimes, on your skin.
>>WOLFE: Right.
If you have a very bad
gash, you put cayenne.
You pack it right in there.
One of the women who runs my
farm, she gashed her hand.
11 stitches right
here is what she
would have needed as
she found out later.
But she didn't get any stitches.
She gashed her hand
on a piece of glass,
all the way across right there.
I packed it with cayenne.
I packed it with noni.
I packed it with MSM.
I packed it with vitamin
C, after cleaning it out
with colloidal silver.
And then wrapped it
really, really tight.
The next day we
cleaned it out again.
Packed all those herbs back in--
the cayenne, the noni, the MSM,
the vitamin C. And and
then wrapped it up again.
About three days after
that, she finally
went and had it looked at.
And they basically said
she didn't need stitches
at that point, but she probably
would have needed 11 stitches.
So that's how powerful
this kind of stuff can be.
It will heal.
It will draw the
tissue back together.
>>LISA: And that's interesting
because that's really,
you could see the blood
building proponents in action
right there.
>>WOLFE: Right there.
Right.
That really alarmed me.
'Cause I thought, OK.
At least we stopped
the bleeding.
Everything's cool.
But that she didn't actually get
the stitches later was a sign
of how powerful foods and herbs
can be -- and supplements.
>>LISA: It's cell food.
Cell food.
>>WOLFE: OK.
So I'm just going to
take a pinch of cayenne.
Just get a little bit in there.
Do you like it hot?
>>LISA: Uh, yeah.
Go ahead.
>>WOLFE: OK.
I'm into hot.
So let's do a little bit more.
OK.
Great.
And then we're going
to do a pinch of salt.
Salt brings out
sweetness-- not sugariness.
This is a non-sweetened
drink, so we
want to bring out the
sweetness but not a sugariness.
So salt does that.
>>LISA: But it also
provides potassium and--
>>WOLFE: Right.
And it bottoms out a
lot of these raw foods.
A lot of these raw foods
are very rich in potassium,
so we need to
balance with sodium.
I like sea salt, by the way.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Talk about salts.
There's a lot of salts
out there right now.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
And there's a lot of
salt in your body.
'Cause you're not a
river; you're an ocean.
Your tissues are salty.
>>LISA: The blood's the river.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
The blood is the river.
But I mean like if we think
about a river or a creek--
you know, we're here in Colorado
where there's creeks going by.
Our blood isn't like that.
It's actually salty.
And so that's why
we want to make sure
we have a little bit of salt
in there somewhere in our diet.
If we're oversalted, we've
got to go off the salt.
Let it flush out of our system.
And then at some point,
we have to go back
onto the right kind of
salt, which is sea salt.
>>LISA: I'm glad you said that,
because diabetic condition,
they usually tell you
to stay away from salt.
>>WOLFE: Yeah, 'cause
you've gotta get off of it.
For sometimes years.
But forever?
That's a big jump.
I get it.
OK.
We've gotta get off for years.
But forever?
That's a jump.
>>LISA: Because you
do need a little bit
of the right type
of salt in your body
in order to balance
out the blood.
>>WOLFE: You got it.
>>LISA: That's
what you're saying.
OK.
>>WOLFE: Exactly.
To balance out the potassium.
Potassium's a great healer
if you're oversalted.
It's going to flush all
that salt out of you.
Raw foods.
How's that?
>>LISA: So if you get
ahold of a salty meal.
But that's if you're eating food
ever after this entire demo.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
I mean, you may want to do
this for like a day, a week,
a month-- for years.
OK.
So we're going to put
the coconut water in now,
and we're going to be ready
to blend that thing up.
This is going to
be a powerhouse.
>>LISA: Wow.
Look at the way that
that turned out.
That's beautiful.
>>WOLFE: OK.
This is blood.
>>LISA: Did I get this on right?
No.
>>WOLFE: Like that.
There we go.
>>LISA: Are you sure?
>>WOLFE: I hope so.
I've had these things
blow off and hit the wall.
>>LISA: This would
be hard to get out.
Even though I am
wearing a green dress,
this would be hard to
get out of the walls.
OK.
Yeah.
These are foods that they
make clothes dyes from.
>>WOLFE: That's right.
Exactly.
OK.
Here we go.
We're launching.
>>LISA: High.
>>WOLFE: We're gonna just get
those cashews all completely
ground down.
The cacao completely
This is going to taste amazing.
>>LISA: I'm just
going to hold it on.
Hold it on?
>>WOLFE: This is going
to be extraordinary.
We'll need a couple of cups.
We'll need a couple glasses.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>WOLFE: OK.
Looks like we've got those
cashews completely broken down.
Let's get some cups in here.
Coming in from our
studio audience.
Let's see what we got.
So this one will be for you.
Uh-oh.
Milkshakey.
Right?
>>LISA: It looks like-- yeah.
Once you blend in all the--
Cheers to the best day ever.
The best drink ever.
>>WOLFE: You're
bloody well right.
>>LISA: Mmm.
>>WOLFE: Come on.
>>LISA: That's good!
>>WOLFE: Come on!
>>LISA: That's really good.
Got a little kick in
there from the cayenne.
>>WOLFE: By the way, the
cayenne comes to the top.
It comes into the head, just
so you're aware of that.
Sometimes you'll
get a little bit
of a blast in that first pass.
But deeper in, it's not there.
>>LISA: Wow.
That is so good.
It really does taste
like a milkshake.
>>WOLFE: This is
like St. Patty's Day.
Right?
Green?
>>LISA: It's got a little
bit of texture to it, too.
This is a complete meal.
And you're balancing
your blood sugar.
You've put no sugar or
artificial ingredients
into your body at all.
And these are things that
David, through his 20
years of research with
all this, has put together
through his own
exclusive experience.
>>WOLFE: Right.
Exactly.
>>LISA: We're really, really
fortunate to have you.
Thank you so much.
>>WOLFE: This to me is
like when I was a kid,
my uncle showed me how
to use a blender when
I was four years old.
And we're using Minute
Maid frozen orange juice
and throwing ice in there.
And that was the original thing.
But all these years, I've been
developing my blender skills.
And I always think about my
uncle getting me into this.
>>LISA: And look what
you've done though.
>>WOLFE: And then we've
gotten it to here.
This is where we are now.
>>LISA: And look what you've
brought all the communities out
there, and people's health.
You've brought so
much information to us
that we would not
regularly know about.
And so I appreciate you
bringing all this to the world.
>>WOLFE: Thank you.
>>LISA: All right.
Thank you.
>>WOLFE: Cheers.
>>LISA: Great.
All right.
So who doesn't need a
little more brain power?
Who doesn't want to get
rid of that foggy thinking
or have a better memory?
Be able to be sharper,
more on your game.
Well, joining me is master
blender chef David Wolfe,
and we're going to
be putting together
a drink that has to do with
boosting your brain power.
And how exactly does that work?
So it's obviously not brain
here that we're taking.
>>WOLFE: Well, there's
an unwritten assumption
about all this that we're
going to create here.
And that is we're
doing something.
That means we're not
doing something else.
And that's important is we can
use that crowding-out principle
to regain our brain
power, regain our health.
Just do the healthy
things, and it naturally
crowds out the unhealthy things.
>>LISA: And it's really
ultimately about circulation.
Right?
Getting blood to the
brain, oxygen to the brain.
>>WOLFE: That's part of what's
going to happen here for sure.
Yep.
So that's the
first thing is what
we're not going to be doing.
>>LISA: So we're not
going to be clouding
the brain with a
bunch of heavy toxins.
>>WOLFE: And gluey stuff.
>>LISA: Right.
We're going to be
clearing the pathways.
increasing circulation
with this wonderful
brain booster drink.
So this is, by
the way, something
that you can do at any time.
You can do this before a test.
If you need to have a
high-performance thinking
for anything.
Even if you go to
the market and you
want to remember
your grocery list.
I mean this is
always-- it's always
great to have high
brain functionality.
'Cause then, of
course, you're happier.
>>WOLFE: That is right.
And you can get things done.
And actually, I notice that
when my brain is really sharp,
the thought shows up
just a second before,
and I'm speaking,
but the thought
is already there of the second
thing that's going to happen
and the third thing.
>>LISA: So you're not
searching for words, names.
Yeah.
>>WOLFE: So you're
on top of your game.
OK.
Now what we're
going to do is we're
going to make an almond
milk-based type of beverage
here.
And this is our almond
milk right here.
You could blend a bunch of
almonds with spring water
in a blender like
this over here.
Let's bring that on out.
And you could just
do that at home.
Put some almonds in
there, spring water.
Blend it, and then strain it.
That's one way to do
it or you can put it
through a cheesecloth.
Or you can just get
almond milk that's
already prepared for you.
Many different ways
to go about this.
But we're--
>>LISA: That's how you
make the almond milk?
>>WOLFE: --taking the upgrade.
Instead of going to cow milk--
>>LISA: Right.
This is non-dairy.
>>WOLFE: We're
taking the upgrade.
>>LISA: So you just put
almonds in a blender
with a little spring milk.
You blend it up, and
then you strain out
the meat of the almond
in order to get the milk.
>>WOLFE: Right.
Exactly.
Right.
OK.
So that's going to be our base.
But that's going to go in last.
This is important
because, again,
if we make a
mistake here-- let's
say I was playing
around with cinnamon.
All of a sudden I threw
the whole bag of cinnamon
in there accidentally.
I can still fix it.
But once there's liquid in
there, I'm not fishing it out.
The whole thing has
to be thrown away.
>>LISA: That's not such a
mistake with the cinnamon.
But this one?
That one's got an aroma to it.
>>WOLFE: Bacopa.
This thing's aromatic.
We're going to get
there in a second.
Another part of this
whole brain boosting
is making sure we have
stable blood sugar.
And that's why we put
mesquite in this drink.
And that's our first
ingredient is mesquite.
And mesquite is one of
the most invasive trees
in the whole world actually.
And it's invasive
exactly where we
need it, which is the places
where we're having epidemics
of diabetes and epidemics
of hypoglycemia.
>>LISA: Really?
>>WOLFE: So, yeah.
So like in the state
of Arizona, mesquite
is absolutely an
invasive species there.
And it was brought over
from the cattle from Texas.
It was in their bodies.
The seeds were in their bodies.
And when they brought the
cattle over to Arizona
and they took the
cattle off the trains
and they started
walking around, what
came out the other
side is mesquite seeds.
So now mesquite is
heavily prevalent in areas
where there's diabetes
epidemic-- like Phoenix,
Arizona.
>>LISA: Why are there
diabetes epidemics
in those specific regions?
>>WOLFE: Well, that's
where people go to retire.
And that's when you reach
about 60, 65 years of age,
you start developing
diabetes syndromes.
Now this is a syndrome.
I'm not talking about
diabetes type 2, obviously.
Diabetes type 2, it's a
mineral deficiency syndrome.
It's a toxicity syndrome.
And as soon as we
flip it around--
and it's also a
syndrome of not eating
enough fresh food and raw food.
If you eat raw, fresh food, you
eat highly mineralized food.
And you take
enzymes, for example,
and do things like this,
the symptoms just go away.
>>LISA: This is healing
from the inside out.
>>WOLFE: Absolutely.
>>LISA: The opposite
is taking something
to fix that, which is important.
But this is the way to
start from the inside
out-- the health coming
from the inside out.
>>WOLFE: I worked
with Dr. Cousens
out in the state of
Arizona for 13 years.
And he's the number one
diabetes doctor in the world.
He's actually healing
people of diabetes type 2.
Native American peoples--
all different types
of folks in the
state of Arizona who
have this epidemic of diabetes.
And again, it's a syndrome.
And he wrote an amazing
book on the subject.
So that's my education.
So I don't come at it
as really a disease.
I come at it as
more of a syndrome.
>>LISA: And that's
how he's doing
it is through natural foods
and through various elixirs?
>>WOLFE: Through raw foods
and supplements and enzymes.
Now we're going to
that in there just
to have stable blood sugar.
That is really important.
Because in order to stay clear
all day, if you're up and down,
and you're freaking
out, and you're
going this way and that
way, and you're crashing--
you can't keep your
head on straight.
We know that sugar is
actually a trigger.
If we can't stabilize
our blood sugar
and we have an elevated
blood sugar all of a sudden,
that it can trigger mood swings.
It can trigger
schizophrenic and bipolar.
All these things
are related to that.
So we want to just
[MAKES A SWISHING SOUND]
keep it smooth.
>>LISA: So anyone knows if you
ever had that low blood sugar
feeling and if you eat something
that's got sugar in it,
you're great for a little while.
And then you're going to
plummet right back down.
>>WOLFE: That's right.
OK.
So now we are going
to put honey in here
because honey is a brain food.
But we put the
mesquite with the honey
in order to neutralize it.
To keep it smooth.
Now honey is one of the
great superfoods on Earth.
If you don't have a
blood sugar disorder,
well, it's the summation
of your ecosystem.
Right?
Rudolph Steiner
said it this way.
Is that it mixes the atmosphere
with the water of your body.
Where does that happen?
In your throat.
Right?
We're mostly water.
Where's the connection?
Like we're breathing in air.
Where does it touch water?
It's in our lungs.
It's in our throat.
That's where the dry
air meets our wet body.
And honey coats that, so
it helps to bridge that gap
and soothe your throat.
And he said it connects
the air with the water.
It's a very interesting idea.
>>LISA: And it also has
vitamins, and it has minerals.
And it has--
>>WOLFE: Minerals and nutrients.
>>LISA: --protein.
Some of it.
>>WOLFE: Probably
more than anything
is it's a great source of
really bio-available glucose
that's not been coagulated.
So it's easy to digest, and it's
a brain food of par excellence.
Now studies have been
done on kids with honey.
Increase of IQ by 10 points
for honey-eating children.
>>LISA: But there's
all these warnings
on the label saying not to eat
it underneath one years old.
>>WOLFE: That's just a
warning about botulism.
It's highly improbable
that that could happen,
but it's good to be warned.
And that's why we've heard that.
OK.
So let's get this in there.
Ooh.
That's going to be really good.
I'm going to have to have
a little taste of this.
Let me just get a
little bit more.
>>LISA: It doesn't
have protein in it.
Honey doesn't, right?
It's the bee pollen
and the other bee
products that have the protein.
Right?
>>WOLFE: Are actually
complete protein sources.
That's right.
OK.
So let's just have a
little taste of that.
>>LISA: Ooh.
This is the good stuff.
I like the honey.
>>WOLFE: And when I say it's
a summation of your ecosystem,
I'm talking about allergies.
If you have allergies to your
ecosystem-- pollen allergies,
hay fever-- honey's a
great thing to have.
>>LISA: So you should
always buy local honey.
>>WOLFE: Local honey.
I like exotic
honeys too, though.
I buy both.
>>LISA: Well, also,
if you're trying
to get used to
the local pollens,
then those bees will have
harvested them, right?
So the local honey's good.
OK.
>>WOLFE: Absolutely.
Now the next thing
is reishi mushroom,
and this is one of my
favorites ever of all time.
I'm a fanatic about
reishi mushroom.
Reishi mushroom is the
most well-studied herb
in the history of the world.
I got a book that
was given to me.
It was put together by the
Chinese Academy of Sciences,
and it had well over
400 studies on reishi.
And it is a 330 page book.
>>LISA: Herb for--?
>>WOLFE: Everything.
>>LISA: Not only longevity.
It's--
>>WOLFE: Longevity.
Immunity.
Joint protection.
Even blood sugar.
>>LISA: Which actually
is all connected.
>>WOLFE: It's all connected.
Right.
It's a pure tonic adaptogen.
It adapts to whatever you
need and how you need it.
It's also a super
powerful brain food.
When I started doing this kind
of a thing-- now the reason
why I like it in
this form is this
is about the equivalent of
about 30 capsules opened up.
You go to a health food
store, you buy reishi mushroom
in capsules-- you're going to
have to go through a lot of 'em
to get the effect
we're looking for.
That's why we got into
this idea of just,
let's just get
people the powder so
they can do as
much as they want.
They can feed their kids
as much as they want.
>>LISA: Then you don't have
to take 30 pills a day.
>>WOLFE: Right.
Or open them all up if
you don't want to do that.
Anyway, reishi is a tremendous
brain food, and you feel it.
When you do a dose like this,
you feel it in your brain.
And I started going like, I'm
feeling like high or something.
Like, what is this?
I didn't know this
in the beginning
because I didn't
know the research.
'Cause the research is vast.
It's thousands of
years of research.
Hundreds of
thousands of studies.
And so I started feeling
like something's going on.
I mean, I'm feeling like
sharp, clear, on it.
I remember back
in the early days
when my computer used
to be in my house.
And I would be like-- just
everything would be clear.
And I was like, what is it?
Something different
that I'm doing now
that I wasn't doing before.
So then I locked on to reishi.
Then I started talking to
experts on reishi mushroom,
like Ron Teeguarden.
And he's like, oh, yeah.
Of course.
And I was like, woah.
I mean, this needs to be known.
This has got to be known.
>>LISA: The studies show that
it increases blood circulation?
What do the studies show?
>>WOLFE: Well it
does everything.
So let's say you
have gluey blood.
It's agglutinated, which means
it's like thick and soupy.
Reishi mushroom will
thin your blood out.
So it's a great blood
thinner, actually.
It has that property.
It also has many
other properties.
Let's say you have
high blood pressure.
Reishi mushrooms,
top herb in the world
for bringing down
high blood pressure.
>>LISA: It's interesting
because mushroom is also known
as a fungus, but this
type of thing takes the--
>>WOLFE: This is the
queen of the mushrooms.
The queen of all mushrooms.
So lumping all
fungi, like candida,
into the category
of reishi is kind
of like lumping a human in with
the same category as a rat.
You know what I mean?
So this is the best
thing, actually,
if you have candida or any
kind of blood sugar disorder
like that where your body
is reacting to the sugar
or you have thrush that occurs.
This is the best thing
actually, reishi mushroom.
And I first heard about
that from Andrew Weil.
Doctor Weil was
saying that, and I
was like, this guy's
really onto mushrooms.
And then I later became even
more into mushrooms than he is.
>>LISA: Now we know why.
OK.
So--
>>WOLFE: There we go.
>>LISA: That's in there?
All right.
>>WOLFE: Big tablespoon--
heaping tablespoon--
of reishi mushroom is in there.
OK.
Next on the list is one
of the great super kind
of herbs that grows
in my front yard.
And it grows all through India.
And it grows through
all the tropics.
And on our farm in Hawaii,
we have this as a weed.
It's all around.
And it's a super
brain tonic, and it
is for the reason
you've been kind
of wanting me to get to--
increases brain circulation.
And that's gachu
kola or gotu kola.
>>LISA: Gotu kola?
OK.
I've heard of this before.
>>WOLFE: OK.
So that's gotu kola as a powder.
If you buy super green
foods in a store--
You know, people buy whatever
green thing is on the store,
even though it tastes awful.
We know it's good for us.
This is going to
be definitely one
of the ingredients
that's in there.
It's in all of those formulas.
>>LISA: So it's in the green
food bars or those types?
>>WOLFE: Yes.
Absolutely.
And it's just a brain tonic.
Love it.
We used to have it
delivered to my house,
fresh like wheatgrass, in trays.
And we'd juice it.
>>LISA: What does it look
like in its raw form?
>>WOLFE: It has almost like
a semi-circular leaf, kind
of like that.
And the stem comes from just
off-center from the middle.
So it's like the
mallows, if you're
familiar with those
plants, or marshmallow.
Those are very common
in Southern California.
It's one of the most
common weeds around.
And gachu kola looks
just like that.
It has a circular leaf,
semi-circular to some degree.
>>LISA: And then you grow
this where you live in--
>>WOLFE: It's a weed there.
>>LISA: It's indigenous to--
>>WOLFE: It's
indigenous to Hawaii.
It's all over Hawaii.
It's all over India.
It's all over the tropics,
anywhere in the world.
You'll see it growing.
>>LISA: That's amazing.
Now what if you were to eat the
leaf of something like that?
Do you not want to do that?
>>WOLFE: It's geat.
No, it's awesome.
>>LISA: Most of the
nutrient's in the stem.
>>WOLFE: No, it's in the leaf.
>>LISA: It's in the leaf?
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
And you can eat it,
just like a salad green.
So when I'm at home in
Hawaii, I'm eating that.
That's one of my salad greens.
Yeah.
I'm out there picking
it as a salad green.
And I try to get three in a day.
Like if I'm out in the garden,
I have certain things--
like tulsi.
I try to eat a tulsi
leaf every day.
Things that are in
my garden, I try
to just make sure I
get that in every day.
>>LISA: The tulsi and what else?
>>WOLFE: And gotu
kola is one of 'em.
Also I have these charapita
peppers that grow.
And I try to do one
of those every day.
It's like a habanero but
really, really small.
So there's certain
things in my yard
that I do just to kind of like--
>>LISA: So those are
all circulation--
>>WOLFE: Driven
>>LISA: --promoting--?
>>WOLFE: Exactly.
>>LISA: OK.
Great.
All right so--
>>WOLFE: OK.
Now this is a real powerful
circulation-driven substance,
and it's also a brain tonic.
It's probably one of the
greatest plants in the world.
It's eighth most
abundant plant on Earth.
And it's purslane.
In India, they have targeted
it to a particular one,
which they call brome.
It's a particular
variety of purslane.
And this is it as a powder,
sometimes called bacopa.
>>LISA: Bacopa?
Powder?
>>WOLFE: As a powder.
It's a brain tonic.
It's for people who have
neurological problems.
It's really one of the
great herbs of the world.
Now in the powder, it
doesn't taste good as fresh.
>>LISA: Fresh.
It's just a--
>>WOLFE: It's a succulent.
You've seen it before.
It's the eighth most
abundant plant on earth.
It's a little succulent that
grows and has little succulent
leaves.
And it's everywhere.
It's all over
Southern California.
It's all over the world.
Every tropical
ecosystem, it's around.
>>LISA: Gosh, yeah.
We need to be able
to identify that one.
>>WOLFE: It contains
EPA, by the way,
which is what's in fish oil.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
Really?
>>WOLFE: Yes
>>LISA: In a plant.
>>WOLFE: Now if you're
using bacopa at home,
use a small amount.
That's a quarter of a
teaspoon we just used.
That might even be too
much, because this stuff
is really rough.
Mixed in with everything,
it's going to be fine.
>>LISA: Rough, meaning potent?
>>WOLFE: It's potent.
Yeah.
And you taste it, and you're
like, woah, woah, woah,
>>LISA: But if you're accustomed
to that kind of taste,
it's fine.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
>>LISA: Tastes like most
of the Chinese herbs.
>>WOLFE: I'm used to
eating Chinese herbs that
are like so horrible
and like egregious.
>>LISA: David goes.
Just peels the bark off
and just starts chewing.
And that's that.
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
I mean if you're there, great.
But if you're not,
I'm just warnin' ya.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
>>WOLFE: OK.
So what do you think's next?
Looks like cinnamon over there.
>>LISA: Cinnamon.
Ah, good.
>>WOLFE: OK.
You want to do that one?
>>LISA: Mmm.
Yes.
>>WOLFE: OK.
Cinnamon-- blood
sugar stability.
That's important.
Again, we're doing the
mesquite and the cinnamon
at the top and the bottom
to just keep us in that zone
so we can be clear.
'Cause when our blood
sugar is stable,
then we can actually
think clearly.
If it's up and down and
backwards and forwards,
we can't.
>>LISA: So now, I
need this, obviously,
because I've forgotten this.
We have mesquite.
>>WOLFE: Yep.
>>LISA: Honey.
>>WOLFE: Yes.
>>LISA: OK.
Need the brain.
>>WOLFE: This was
reishi mushroom.
>>LISA: Reishi.
>>WOLFE: Gotu kola.
Bacopa.
And then we had cinnamon.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
Mix it with almond milk.
>>WOLFE: OK.
I think you need this drink to
remember what's in the drink.
>>LISA: I do. [LAUGHS]
>>WOLFE: So here
goes the almond milk.
>>LISA: OK.
Woah.
All right.
Making enough for everyone.
>>WOLFE: If you wanted to,
and I do this at home a lot,
I would even add maybe half
as much again of a tea.
So let's say I had my gynostemma
tea or one of my favorite teas
over here.
I could just grab
that, pour it in here
and then actually create kind
of like a hot, milky kind
of a drink.
>>LISA: So right now, this
could be a cold drink.
What if you were to put
something like ice in this?
Would it--
>>WOLFE: That'd be fine.
>>LISA: disturb
their properties?
>>WOLFE: Nope.
>>LISA: Or hot?
Is it OK as well?
>>WOLFE: I like
going in the winter,
I like adding like an
almond milk to a hot tea.
Sometimes 50-50, and
then the herbs go in.
And see, there's no calories
in any of those herbs.
>>LISA: I'm glad
you mentioned that.
So right.
>>WOLFE: So we have a
little bit of calories
with the almond milk.
We have a little
bit with the honey.
But that's really all we need.
We don't need to
be blasting down
hamburger-level
calories all day long.
>>LISA: Or giant
smoothies or shakes.
>>WOLFE: Right.
Which are high in calories.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Pretty high in calories.
>>WOLFE: This is very
low in calories as
compared to a
smoothie, for example.
>>WOLFE: But is this as filling?
>>WOLFE: Yes.
Because the herbs fill it out.
Especially mesquite.
I mean, that's
another thing-- that's
kind of a secret reason
why I use mesquite.
Because it's filling.
>>LISA: So what
is it-- by filling
you mean it nourishes the cell.
>>WOLFE: No, no, no.
I mean like it gets in your gut.
And you go, oh, OK.
I'm full.
>>LISA: Really?
>>WOLFE: Yeah.
You'll see.
You ready?
>>LISA: I am.
I get to use my power tools.
>>WOLFE: Let's pop
the top on there.
>>LISA: Oh, first.
>>WOLFE: Well, up there or here.
Whatever.
OK.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
This is my favorite part.
>>WOLFE: OK.
Here we go.
>>LISA: All right.
So now, all the way up.
Right?
>>WOLFE: Yep.
>>LISA: I'm not going to talk.
>>WOLFE: Now we can
even go into hyperdrive.
Here we go.
[SOUND OF A CLICK AND BLENDER
SPEED INCREASES]
>>LISA: All right.
OK.
Done?
>>WOLFE: Yes.
>>LISA: All right.
>>WOLFE: This is going
to be really good.
Hold on.
>>LISA: I did that.
Oh, yes.
OK.
So I could drive the
guys in the booth crazy,
and I could talk
during that segment.
I could go like this.
>>WOLFE: It's hard to hear
over that blender, iIsn't it?
OK now.
Let's give it a go.
Yeah.
>>LISA: All right.
That looks-- actually
it's beautiful.
>>WOLFE: It's going
to be so good.
>>LISA: I mean, it
looks like something--
so this could be a
combination of a-- cheers!
>>WOLFE: Cheers!
>>LISA: To your health!
>>WOLFE: All right.
Let's see if our brain's gonna
work after we drink this.
>>LISA: I should have prepared
the Gettysburg Address
so that I could recite it.
>>WOLFE: That's good, isn't it?
I mean, that is--
>>LISA: It's really good, yes.
That's really good.
>>WOLFE: Oh, man.
>>LISA: We can't talk
because it's just so good.
>>WOLFE: We need to
keep the cameras going
so that the people behind the
cameras can't come in here
and have any of this smoothie.
>>LISA: This is really good.
So to boost your
brain power-- and who
doesn't need a little
more of that in a world
where it gets a little
bit busy out there?
This is wonderful.
This is such a great alternative
to a lot of the things that
are out there, and you
see how easy it is.
And these herbs are
very accessible.
>>WOLFE: It's kind of
the same but different.
Right?
It's the same idea
that we've done before.
It's like, OK.
We're using a blender.
We've got various
different powders.
But instead of it being some
super weight gain or whey
protein, flex-o-fuel--
whatever that stuff is--
>>LISA: That has an ingredients
list this thick, yeah.
>>WOLFE: And major
chemicals in it.
This is just all herbs
and food, and it's
driving us towards
the result that we
want-- which is
better brain health.
>>LISA: Yeah.
And there's a lot of history
behind all of this as well.
So cheers to best day ever.
Be sure to check out
David's secret recipes
for balancing your blood sugar
and increasing your brain
function on Gaiam TV--
only available on Gaiam TV.
And have the best life ever.